# Klaas-Jan Stol, Lero-the Irish Software Research Centre

THE NATURE OF work is changing dramatically through trends such as the commodification of expertise and democratization of participation. [?] For example, professional stock photographers used to be able to charge hundreds of dollars for a picture. (Howe, "The Rise of Crowdsourcing") Today, sites such as www .istockphoto.com offer professionalquality images for as low as one dollar. Any amateur photographer can offer images through this platform.
Another example is Foldit, a game in which thousands of players work to solve puzzles; the aggregated output helps solve protein-folding problems. (Cooper, "Predicting Protein Structures with a Multiplayer Online Game") Using results from Foldit, researchers solved in just 10 days a complex problem that had stumped them for 15 years.
These are just two instances of work being crowdsourced, disrupting existing business models and work practices. Tapping into the "wisdom of crowds" 4 has become common, offering numerous opportunities to benefit software engineering practice. Today, companies can use a range of crowdsourcing platforms to have software developed or tested. (Zanatta, "Software Crowdsourcing Platforms") A recent survey by Ke Mao and his colleagues reported the many ways in which developers can use crowds throughout the development life cycle. (Mao, "A Survey of the Use of Crowdsourcing in Software Engineering") (Mao also

## FOCUS: GUEST EDITORS' INTRODUCTION

maintains an online index of publications on crowdsourcing in software engineering at crowddev.kemao .uk/cse_repository.) Because crowdsourcing approaches could have a far-reaching impact on future software development, this theme issue explores various ways developers and managers can benefit from these new opportunities.

## What Is Crowdsourcing?

Crowdsourcing isn't new (see the sidebar "Crowdsourcing through the Ages"), but the term "crowdsourcing" was only coined in 2005 by Jeff Howe and Mark Robinson. Howe defined it as the act of a company or institution taking a function once performed by employees and outsourcing it to an undefined (and generally large) network of people in the form of an open call. (Howe, "Crowdsourcing: A Definition") Following this definition, you could think of crowdsourcing as outsourcing to an alternative workforce. (Stol, "Two's Company, Three's a Crowd: A Case Study of Crowdsourcing Software Development")(Ågerfalk, "Not So Shore Anymore: The New Imperatives When Sourcing in the Age of Open") Basically, crowdsourcing leverages the intelligence and contributions of a large group of people to achieve a specific goal, whether it's software development, software testing, or simply sharing knowledge. Crowdsourcing typically involves three parties: a customer who posts a task or a question, a crowd of people who respond by performing the task or answering the question, and a platform that facilitates these interactions.
Contributions are often explicitly requested through an open call, mechanisms such as issue trackers in open source projects, or requests for content or editing on Wikipedia. In other contexts, the open call might be implicit because the contributors themselves determine what to contribute. Crowdsourcing is part of a wider phenomenon in software engineering, characterized by the increasing use of social networks. Developers employ a variety of social networks, including microblogging platforms such as Twitter, 10 code-sharing repositories that facilitate social networks such as GitHub, 11 and question-and-answer (Q&A) platforms such as Stack Overflow. 12

## Ways to Use Crowdsourcing

Crowdsourcing can be used in various ways. Amazon Mechanical Turk facilitates crowdsourcing through microtasks-for example, labeling an image. Unsurprisingly, such simple, quick tasks typically compensate contributors only a few cents or perhaps dollars. On the other end of the spectrum are challenges such as the Netflix Prize contest. [?] That contest offered $1M to anyone who could improve Netflix's movie recommendation system by 10 percent; it attracted more than 5,000 submissions.
To better understand how crowdsourcing can be used, David Geiger developed a 2D taxonomy (see Figure 1). [?] The first dimension is whether the crowd's output is emergent or nonemergent. Emergent

## CROWDSOURCING THROUGH THE AGES

Even though the term "crowdsourcing" was coined only about a decade ago, numerous examples exist of crowdsourcing throughout history. Here are three.

## THE LONGITUDE ACT

In 1714, the British Parliament passed the Longitude Act, which offered a series of rewards to anyone who invented a practical method to determine longitude at sea. [?]

## NAPOLEON'S CANS

When Napoleon was expanding his empire in Europe, he employed large armies of soldiers, who needed to be fed. As the armies moved away from the proximity of French farms, he needed a way to preserve food. The French government offered 12,000 francs to anyone who invented a practical method to store food without it going to waste-a prize that was awarded in 1810 for canned food.

## SYDNEY'S OPERA HOUSE

In 1955, the Prime Minister of New South Wales, Australia offered £5,000 for the winning design of a building for Sydney's harbor. The winner was one of 233 submissions. Sydney's Opera House is one of many examples of crowdsourced architectural designs.

## FOCUS: GUEST EDITORS' INTRODUCTION

value results from the combination of contributions; nonemergent value is derived from the individual contributions themselves. The second dimension is whether contributions are homogeneous or heterogeneous.
The two dimensions lead to four types of crowdsourcing tasks. The fi rst type is rating, which is when the crowd is asked to offer a judgment. An example is user ratings of apps in mobile-app stores such as Google Play. A single rating offers little value, but a large group of ratings can give considerable insight. [?] The second type of task is processing; contributions represent actions the crowd can perform. An example of this is bug reporting. Although bugs vary in complexity, each bug report is basically the same in that it provides new insight on a software product and thus adds value on its own. Labeling images on Mechanical Turk also falls in this category.
The third type of task is creation, which relies on a set of heterogeneous contributions that together generate something of value. An example of this is open source software. Contributions are heterogeneous because each contribution differs in nature, size, and complexity. The value is generated through combining all contributions; the result is an open source software system.
The fourth type of task is problem solving, which yields heterogeneous contributions, each of which is judged in its own regard and useful on its own. This category represents diffi cult tasks requiring signifi cant creativity. The Netfl ix Prize contest falls in this category. Some crowdsourcing platforms feature all four types. One such example is Topcoder, the largest crowdsourcing platform for software development, with over one million members. Creation happens when a customer crowdsources a complete solution through a large number of crowdsourcing competitions. Rating happens when participants evaluate the submissions. An example of processing is Topcoder's bug hunt competitions, which pay participants for each new bug they fi nd. Finally, Topcoder's design challenges represent problem solving.
These differences in crowdsourcing approaches affect the size of the crowd that's involved. Rating tasks involve many individuals; the result is an aggregation of the individual contributions (for example, a mobile app's average score). Creation tasks' outputs are also meant to be combined into a single outcome. Problemsolving tasks might involve many individuals or teams, but typically only one solution is selected. Consequently, only the winning team receives a reward, as was the case with the Net fl ix Prize. Thomas LaToza and his colleagues suggested a hybrid approach, proposing recombinations of intermediate results in software design tasks so that crowd members can "borrow from the crowd." [?] Other dimensions are important in shaping crowdsourcing platforms. [?] Such dimensions include the locus of control in soliciting contributions, the nature of incentives offered to contributors, and the amount of context required for someone to contribute.

## Reasons for Using Crowdsourcing

Companies can use crowdsourcing approaches to address various needs. [?](Mao, "A Survey of the Use of Crowdsourcing in Software Engineering") First, crowdsourcing can Heterogeneous contributions Contributions are qualitatively judged differently and independently. Homogeneous contributions Contributions are valued equally. Emergent Value is derived from a set of contributions. Nonemergent Contributions are independently valuable. Rating Processing Creation Problem solving Example: Open source software Example: Stack Overflow Q&A forum Example: Bug reporting Example: User ratings of mobile apps FIGURE 1. A taxonomy of crowdsourcing tasks. 14 Two dimensions (emergentnonemergent and homogeneous-heterogeneous) lead to four types of tasks: rating, processing, creation, and problem solving.
be considered an alternative to outsourcing, similar to open-sourcing and inner-sourcing. (Mao, "A Survey of the Use of Crowdsourcing in Software Engineering")[?] Companies simply might not have suffi cient internal resources or expertise to get a certain job done and thus might seek help from the crowd. Or, companies might want early releases of their software evaluated on a range of heterogeneous systems. 17 A second reason for crowdsourcing is to reduce the time to market by splitting a large task into smaller tasks that an equal number of workers perform in parallel. A third reason is to generate a range of solutionseffectively drawing on ideas from a range of people. A fourth reason is to employ specifi c experts to fi nd the best solution to a given problem.

## In This Issue

We received 18 submissions for this theme issue. On the basis of a thorough review process, we selected six articles that demonstrate how software development can benefi t from crowdsourcing as either a source of knowledge needed to develop new software or a source for ideas and feedback on existing software. Interestingly, each chosen article deals with a different development phase (see Table 1). Furthermore, the authors are from research groups across the globe, including North America, South America, Europe, and the Middle East.
In "Barriers Faced by Newcomers to Software-Crowdsourcing Projects," Alexandre Zanatta and his colleagues examine how new developers join software crowdsourcing projects and, as the title suggests, the variety of barriers they face. By discovering what the barriers are in a project, its owners and other involved developers can take appropriate action to remove those barriers, which in turn can help to involve more people. Ultimately, crowdsourcing aims to involve a large number of developers-that's what makes it crowdsourcing. If suffi cient people are involved, success will be more likely.
In "The Crowd in Requirements Engineering: The Landscape and Challenges," Eduard Groen and his colleagues discuss how to engage the crowd in requirements elicitation. Requirements elicitation is a key activity in software development-after all, getting system requirements right early during a project can prevent much rework. Groen and his colleagues distinguish between pull feedback, which is initiated by a software supplier, and push feedback, which is initiated by a crowd of customers. Engaging usersthe crowd-to elicit feedback that leads to new system requirements emphasizes the need for the continuous evolution of systems. However, this approach has its challenges, as the authors discuss.
In "What Do Developers Use the Crowd For? A Study Using Stack In "Leveraging the Power of the Crowd for Software Testing," Niklas Leicht and his colleagues argue that testing is becoming increasingly challenging because of the increased variety of hardware configurations. They present three crowdsourced software-testing approaches, each illustrated with a real-world case study. The article concludes with concrete steps for getting started.
In "CrowdSummarizer: Automated Generation of Code Summaries for Java Programs through Crowdsourcing," Sahar Badihi and Abbas Heydarnoori propose an approach that leverages the crowd to generate code summaries and employs gamification to motivate developers to contribute. The resulting summaries can help developers quickly gain a good understanding of a code base when they perform software maintenance.
In "App Store 2.0: From Crowdsourced Information to Actionable Feedback in Mobile Ecosystems," María Gómez and her colleagues describe an architecture for future mobile-app stores. They discuss how they implemented several of this architecture's key components (and provide links to their earlier research that offers technical details). App stores are a prime example of a software ecosystem, a trend that's becoming increasingly important to the software industry. 18 Software ecosystems consist of a platform (for example, Android, iOS, or the Eclipse IDE), third-party extension or plugin providers (app developers), and users. The article demonstrates that a software ecosystem that's designed to leverage different types of crowds greatly benefits all the stakeholders in the ecosystem.
S ome examples of crowd- sourcing such as Stack Overflow, bug bounties, and open source development are already firmly established. But we believe that many additional forms of crowdsourcing have the potential to further disrupt software development practice. Such emerging topics might seem irrelevant to the daily practice of software engineering, in which project deadlines are common and developers have little time to experiment with new approaches. One goal of this theme issue is to help overcome that mind-set by showcasing a variety of visions and practical use cases of crowdsourcing.
The practice of software engineering is continually changing. New best practices emerge at companies that are willing to experiment, and researchers are proposing new techniques and models that could help software companies achieve their goals. The future of software engineering will involve a variety of collaborations beyond traditional organizational boundaries, including crowd communities. The articles in this theme issue offer a taste of what this future might look like. We hope they inspire software professionals to consider how tomorrow's software systems can benefit from crowdsourcing.
For a list of useful crowdsourcing resources, see the related sidebar.
Many forms of crowdsourcing have the potential to further disrupt software development practice.
